CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

We highly value and encourage contributions from the community!

Racklet is [Apache 2.0 licensed](LICENSE) and accepts contributions via [GitHub Pull Requests](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/pulls). This document outlines some of the conventions on development workflow, commit message formatting, contact points and other resources to make it easier to get your contribution accepted.

We gratefully welcome improvements to documentation as well as to code.

## Code of Conduct

We are excited about the prospect of you joining our community! The Racklet community abides by the CNCF [code of conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). Here is an excerpt:

_As contributors and maintainers of this project, and in the interest of fostering an open and welcoming community, we pledge to respect all people who contribute through reporting issues, posting feature requests, updating documentation, submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities._

## Community and Access

Join the [racklet@groups.io](https://groups.io/g/racklet) mailing list for calendar invites to calls and edit access to community documents.
You can ask questions and discuss features on the [#racklet](https://osfw.slack.com/messages/racklet/) Slack channel (you can get an invite at [here](https://slack.osfw.dev/)).

In the future, we are also planning to start public, recurring community meetings where anyone can join and
participate in the discussion by adding an agenda item to a public meeting notes document.

## Guidelines

If you have a feature suggestion, or general question about the project or its roadmap, head over to [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/discussions). If you've found a bug, go to [GitHub issues](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/issues) and see if there's an open issue matching your description. If not feel free to open a new issue and add short description:

- In case of a bug, be sure to include the steps you performed and the outcomes as detailedly as possible so it's easy for others to reproduce
- If you have a feature suggestion, describe it in moderate detail and include some potential uses you see for the feature.
   We prioritize the features to be implemented based on their usefulness/popularity. Of course if you want to start contributing yourself, go ahead! We'll be more than happy to review your pull requests.

The maintainers will add the correct labels/milestones to the issue for you.

### Contributing your code

The process to contribute code to Racklet is generally as follows:

1. Go to the project on [GitHub](https://github.com/racklet/racklet) and click the `Fork` button in the top-right corner. This will create your own copy of the repository in your personal account.
2. Using standard `git` workflow, `clone` your fork, make your changes and then `commit` and `push` them to _your_ repository.
3. Go back to [GitHub](https://github.com/racklet/racklet), select `Pull requests` from the top bar and click
   `New pull request` to the right. Select the `compare across forks` link. This will show repositories in addition to branches.
4. From the `head repository` dropdown, select your forked repository. If you made a new branch, select it in the `compare` dropdown.
   You should always target `racklet/racklet` and `main` as the base repository and branch.
5. With your changes visible, click `Create pull request`. Give it a short, descriptive title and write a comment describing your changes.
   Click `Create pull request`.

That's it! Maintainers follow pull requests closely and will add the correct labels and milestones.
After a maintainer's review small changes/improvements could be requested, don't worry, feedback can
be easily addressed by performing the requested changes and doing a `commit` and `push`. Your new
changes will automatically be added to the pull request.

If you have any questions or need help, don't hesitate to ask on our [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/discussions), through [GitHub issues](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/issues),
or the [#racklet](https://osfw.slack.com/messages/racklet/) Slack channel (you can get an invite at [here](https://slack.osfw.dev/)).

Have fun contributing!

Commit message:

Update base layout as per https://github.com/racklet/base-repo-layout/pull/2

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

We highly value and encourage contributions from the community!

Racklet is [Apache 2.0 licensed](LICENSE) and accepts contributions via [GitHub Pull Requests](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/pulls). This document outlines some of the conventions on development workflow, commit message formatting, contact points and other resources to make it easier to get your contribution accepted.

We gratefully welcome improvements to documentation as well as to code.

## Code of Conduct

We are excited about the prospect of you joining our community! The Racklet community abides by the CNCF [code of conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). Here is an excerpt:

_As contributors and maintainers of this project, and in the interest of fostering an open and welcoming community, we pledge to respect all people who contribute through reporting issues, posting feature requests, updating documentation, submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities._

## Community and Access

You can ask questions and discuss features on the [#racklet](https://osfw.slack.com/messages/racklet/) Slack channel (you can get an invite at [here](https://slack.osfw.dev/)).

In the future, we are also planning to start public, recurring community meetings where anyone can join and
participate in the discussion by adding an agenda item to a public meeting notes document.

The community meeting notes document is [here](https://hackmd.io/@racklet/Sk8jHHc7_) (see also the [meeting-notes](https://github.com/racklet/meeting-notes) repo). Look out there for when the community meetings are, and follow the Slack channel.

## Guidelines

If you have a feature suggestion, or general question about the project or its roadmap, head over to [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/discussions). If you've found a bug, go to [GitHub issues](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/issues) and see if there's an open issue matching your description. If not feel free to open a new issue and add short description:

- In case of a bug, be sure to include the steps you performed and the outcomes as detailedly as possible so it's easy for others to reproduce
- If you have a feature suggestion, describe it in moderate detail and include some potential uses you see for the feature.
   We prioritize the features to be implemented based on their usefulness/popularity. Of course if you want to start contributing yourself, go ahead! We'll be more than happy to review your pull requests.

The maintainers will add the correct labels/milestones to the issue for you.

### Contributing your code

The process to contribute code to Racklet is generally as follows:

1. Go to the project on [GitHub](https://github.com/racklet/racklet) and click the `Fork` button in the top-right corner. This will create your own copy of the repository in your personal account.
2. Using standard `git` workflow, `clone` your fork, make your changes and then `commit` and `push` them to _your_ repository.
3. Go back to [GitHub](https://github.com/racklet/racklet), select `Pull requests` from the top bar and click
   `New pull request` to the right. Select the `compare across forks` link. This will show repositories in addition to branches.
4. From the `head repository` dropdown, select your forked repository. If you made a new branch, select it in the `compare` dropdown.
   You should always target `racklet/racklet` (or similar repository) and `main` as the base repository and branch.
5. With your changes visible, click `Create pull request`. Give it a short, descriptive title and write a comment describing your changes.
   Click `Create pull request`.

That's it! Maintainers follow pull requests closely and will add the correct labels and milestones.
After a maintainer's review small changes/improvements could be requested, don't worry, feedback can
be easily addressed by performing the requested changes and doing a `commit` and `push`. Your new
changes will automatically be added to the pull request.

If you have any questions or need help, don't hesitate to ask on our [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/discussions), through [GitHub issues](https://github.com/racklet/racklet/issues),
or the [#racklet](https://osfw.slack.com/messages/racklet/) Slack channel (you can get an invite at [here](https://slack.osfw.dev/)).

Have fun contributing!
